The WYN Star Cluster stands as a huge (50 parsecs diameter) beacon at the crossroads of the Galaxy. Marking the point where the Klingon, Lyran, and Kzinti borders meet, the cluster itself was long considered uninhabitable. Surrounded by a dense cloud of highly radioactive dust, it was assumed that the entire cluster was saturated with deadly radiation. For more than a century, no one tried to find out otherwise.
In Y116 the Kzinti Duke decided that he was the most qualified successor to the patriarchal throne. The fact that the current patriarch was still very much alive was only a technicality. While the battles and intrigues that followed make an interesting 12-volume study in Kzinti politics, the key point is that the Duke, known thereafter as the Usurper, came out on the losing end of a very bloody civil war.
Pursued by the victorious Patriarch, the Usurper led the ragged survivors of his fleet to the edge of the WYN Cluster and plunged directly into it; better to die than be taken prisoner. But the Usurper survived.
The radioactive clouds were discovered to be a relatively thin shell, but only by driving into them at warp 7 could even that brief exposure be tolerated. Given up for dead by his race, the Usurper secretly began constructing a society within the cluster.
Two decades later, an Orion pirate raider fleeing from the Klingons also preferred the apparent suicide of the cluster to capture by the ISF. Captured instead by the Kzinti renegades, the pirate cap tain quickly (and gladly) came to terms. For the next 30 years the pirates (of the Cluster Clan) supplied th WYN with the things it needed most: high-tech manufacturing equipment and population. By the time the Klingons discovered the existence of the WYN "race," some forty million sentient beings resided in the cluster on eight habitable planets. Kzinti renegades, Orion pirates, Lyran families on the losing end of their constant civil wars, and Klingon vassals formed the bulk of the population, but representatives (mostly escaped felons or mercenaries) from almost every known sentient race were present.
The WYN position was perfect for defense for two reasons. First, any ship coming through the radiation belts would disoriented for a considerable period. Until the effects of the radiat1on wore off (P7.0), attacking ships would suffer continuous computer and electronic malfunctions that drastically reduced their effectiveness in combat. The small WYN fleet, which would have been blasted to dust in high space, could easily handle intruders disoriented by the radiation.
The second reason for WYN defensive success was that none of the bordering races could afford to see the others gain control. The WYN Cluster was richer by far in rare minerals and metals than any other region of space. Time and again, Kzinti ships prevented the Klingo-Lyran alliance from overwhelming the cluster, and more than once Klingon or Lyran ships helped keep the Kzintis at bay.
The richness of the cluster supported a strong and growing economy. Trade with the Lyrans, Klingons, and Kzintis proceeded actively from Y159 through the General War. Trade with the WYN was conducted solely on their terms. A cargo ship filled with such things as computers, navigation equipment, spare parts, heavy ship's weapons, drones, and other items would be sent into the cluster under a robot pilot. The WYN fleet would intercept the craft, unload the cargo, and fill it with processed rhodium ore, dilithium crystals, fissionables, platinum, and other items for the return trip. Sometimes terms were arranged by sub-space, and rarely a trade representative would visit the WYN capital, but usually the exchange rates were set by the WYN. On more than one occasion, the connivign WYN would send out the ship at a point close enough to the Kzinti-Lyran or Kzinti­ Klingon border to tempt the neighbors into fighting over it.
The one thing the WYN lacked was a shipyard capable of actu­ally building ships (rather than just converting them). In Y160, the Orions constructed one within the cluster on the condition that it remain under Orion control. The arrangement involved the gift of a CR and several LR class ships (and a further gift of one LR per year) to the WYNs, but gave the Orions one shipyard relatively invulnerable to attack.
